<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<section xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
	data-id="c1"
	data-n="I"
	data-type="chapter"
	class="was-div"
	id="c1"
	role="chapter">
	<h1 class="was-head">CHAPTER I—ANCIENT ENGLAND AND THE ROMANS</h1>
	<p data-id="ch1sc1" data-unit="scene" class="was-milestone">Prehistoric England</p>
	<p data-type="mDate" data-n="d1" class="was-note">
		<span data-instant="false" class="was-date">Before 55 BC</span>
	</p>
	<p data-type="mSummary" class="was-note">Early pre-roman Britain</p>
	<p data-id="ch1sc1an1" class="was-anchor">Introduction</p>


	<p class="was-p">If you look at a Map of the World, you will see, in the left-hand upper corner of the Eastern Hemisphere, two Islands lying in the sea. They are England and Scotland, and Ireland. England and Scotland form the greater part of these Islands. Ireland is the next in size. The little neighbouring islands, which are so small upon the Map as to be mere dots, are chiefly little bits of Scotland,—broken off, I dare say, in the course of a great length of time, by the power of the restless water.</p>
	<p class="was-p">
		<span data-instant="false" class="was-time">In the old days, a long, long while ago, before <span data-type="religion" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">Our Saviour</span> was born on earth and lay asleep in a manger</span>, these Islands were in the same place, and the stormy sea roared round them, just as it roars now. But the sea was not alive, then, with great ships and brave sailors, sailing to and from all parts of the world. It was very lonely. The Islands lay solitary, in the great expanse of water. The foaming waves dashed against their cliffs, and the bleak winds blew over their forests; but the winds and waves brought no adventurers to land upon the Islands, and the savage <span data-type="tribe" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">Islanders</span> knew nothing of the rest of the world, and the rest of the world knew nothing of them.</p>
	<p data-id="ch1sc1an2" class="was-anchor">Phoenician trade</p>
	<p class="was-p">It is supposed that the <span data-type="tribe" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">Phoenicians</span>, who were an ancient people, famous for carrying on trade, came in ships to these Islands, and found that they produced tin and lead; both very useful things, as you know, and both produced to this very hour upon the sea-coast. The most celebrated tin mines in <span data-type="placeRef"
			data-ref="#pl_cornwall"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Cornwall (aka Cornwall, Kernow, Belerion) "
			data-desc="Cornwall is a county of England, in the south-west part of Great Britain."
			data-geo="50.503632 -4.652498"
			data-figure-url="media/pl_cornwall.jpg"
			data-figure-alt="Lanyon Quoit"
			data-figure-desc="Lanyon Quoit is a megalithic monument in Penzance."
			data-figure-avail="Rights Reserved - Free Access"
			data-figure-source-lbl="http://www.europeana.eu/portal/record/2048419/item_V74X25YPAIHVOD7A2BWXYZI24BMLP4CG.html"
			data-figure-source-url="Europeana">Cornwall</span> are, still, close to the sea. One of them, which I have seen, is so close to it that it is hollowed out underneath the ocean; and the miners say, that in stormy weather, when they are at work down in that deep place, they can hear the noise of the waves thundering above their heads. So, the Phoenicians, coasting about the Islands, would come, without much difficulty, to where the tin and lead were.</p>
	<p class="was-p">The Phoenicians traded with the Islanders for these metals, and gave the Islanders some other useful things in exchange. The Islanders were, at first, poor savages, going almost naked, or only dressed in the <span data-type="obRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">rough skins of beasts</span>, and staining their bodies, as other savages do, with coloured earths and the juices of plants. But the Phoenicians, sailing over to the opposite coasts of <span data-type="placeRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">France</span> and <span data-type="placeRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">Belgium</span>, and saying to the people there, ‘We have been to those white cliffs across the water, which you can see in fine weather, and from that country, which is called <em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Britain</em>, we bring this tin and lead,’ tempted some of the French and Belgians to come over also. These people settled themselves on the south coast of England, which is now called <span data-type="placeRef"
			data-ref="#pl_kent"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Kent (Cantium)"
			data-desc="Kent is a country in South East England with a long history of human occupation."
			data-geo="51.1949374 0.1822119"
			data-figure-url="media/pl_kent.jpg"
			data-figure-alt="Ruins of Richborough fort"
			data-figure-desc="The outer defensive works and one wall of Richborough Fort in Kent, which was the main entry point to Britain for Romans."
			data-figure-avail="Public Domain"
			data-figure-source-lbl="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richborough_Castle#/media/File:Richborough_Roman_Fort.JPG"
			data-figure-source-url="Wikipedia">Kent</span>; and, although they were a rough people too, they taught the savage Britons some useful arts, and improved that part of the Islands. It is probable that other people came over from <span data-type="placeRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">Spain</span> to <span data-type="placeRef"
			data-ref="#pl_ireland"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Ireland (Eire, Airlann)"
			data-desc="Ireland was, during prehistoric times, home to Celts."
			data-geo="53.0360895 -17.1358564"
			data-figure-url="media/pl_ireland.jpg"
			data-figure-alt="The Uragh Stone Circle"
			data-figure-desc="Uragh Stone Circle, a neolithic stone circle in Gleninchaquin Park, County Kerry, Republic of Ireland."
			data-figure-avail="Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 2.0 License"
			data-figure-source-lbl="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/0f/Uragh_Stone_Circle.jpg"
			data-figure-source-url="Wikipedia">Ireland</span>, and settled there.</p>
	<p class="was-p">Thus, by little and little, strangers became mixed with the Islanders, and the savage Britons grew into a wild, bold people; almost savage, still, especially in the interior of the country away from the sea where the foreign settlers seldom went; but hardy, brave, and strong.</p>
	<p data-id="ch1sc1an3" class="was-anchor">Geography and Material Culture</p>
	<p class="was-p">The whole country was covered with <span data-type="geo" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">forests</span>, and <span data-type="geo" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">swamps</span>. The greater part of it was very misty and cold. There were no roads, no bridges, no streets, no houses that you would think deserving of the name.<span class="was-seg"> A <span data-type="placeRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">town</span> was nothing but a collection of <span data-type="obRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">straw-covered huts</span>, hidden in a thick wood, with a ditch all round, and a low wall, made of mud, or the trunks of trees placed one upon another</span>. <span class="was-seg">The people planted little or no <span data-type="obRef"
				data-ref="#ob_corn"
				class="was-rs"
				data-name="Corn"
				data-desc=""
				data-url="">corn</span>, but lived upon the flesh of their <span data-type="obRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">flocks</span> and <span data-type="obRef"
				data-ref="#ob_cattle"
				class="was-rs"
				data-name="Cattle"
				data-desc=""
				data-url="">cattle</span>.</span> They made no coins, but used <span data-type="obRef"
			data-ref="#ob_rings"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Metal Rings"
			data-desc=""
			data-url="">metal rings</span> for money. They were clever in <span class="was-seg">basket-work</span>, as savage people often are; and they could make a coarse kind of cloth, and some very bad <span data-type="obRef"
			data-ref="#ob_earthenware"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Earthenware"
			data-desc=""
			data-url="">earthenware</span>. But in building fortresses they were much more clever.</p>
	<p class="was-p">They made <span data-type="obRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">boats</span> of basket-work, covered with the <span data-type="obRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">skins of animals</span>, but seldom, if ever, ventured far from the shore. They made <span data-type="obRef"
			data-ref="#ob_sword"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Sword"
			data-desc=""
			data-url="">swords</span>, of copper mixed with tin; but, these swords were of an awkward shape, and so soft that a heavy blow would bend one. They made light <span data-type="obRef"
			data-ref="#ob_shield"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Shield"
			data-desc=""
			data-url="">shields</span>, short pointed <span data-type="obRef"
			data-ref="#ob_dagger"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Dagger"
			data-desc=""
			data-url="">daggers</span>, and <span data-type="obRef"
			data-ref="#ob_spears"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Spears"
			data-desc=""
			data-url="">spears</span>
		<span data-type="obTrait" data-ref="#ob_spear" class="was-rs">—which they jerked back after they had thrown them at an enemy, by a long strip of leather fastened to the stem. The butt-end was a rattle, to frighten an enemy’s horse.</span> The ancient Britons, being divided into as many as thirty or forty <span data-type="tribe" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">tribes</span>, each commanded by its own little king, were constantly fighting with one another, as savage people usually do; and they always fought with these weapons.</p>

	<p class="was-p">They were very fond of <span data-type="obRef"
			data-ref="#ob_horses"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Horses"
			data-desc=""
			data-url="">horses</span>. The standard of Kent was the picture of a <span data-type="obRef"
			data-ref="#ob_horses"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Horses"
			data-desc=""
			data-url="">white horse</span>. They could break them in and manage them wonderfully well. Indeed, the horses (of which they had an abundance, though they were rather small) were so well taught in those days, that they can scarcely be said to have improved since; though the men are so much wiser. They understood, and obeyed, every word of command; and would stand still by themselves, in all the din and noise of battle, while their masters went to fight on foot. The Britons could not have succeeded in their most remarkable art, without the aid of these sensible and trusty animals. The art I mean, is the construction and management of <span data-type="obRef"
			data-ref="#ob_chariot"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Chariot"
			data-desc=""
			data-url="">war-chariots</span> or cars, for which they have ever been celebrated in history. <span class="was-seg">
			<span data-type="obTrait" data-ref="#ob_chariot" class="was-rs">Each of the best sort of these chariots, not quite breast high in front, and open at the back, contained one man to drive, and two or three others to fight—all standing up.</span> The horses who drew them were so well trained, that they would tear, at full gallop, over the most stony ways, and even through the woods; dashing down their masters’ enemies beneath their hoofs, and cutting them to pieces with the blades of swords, or <span data-type="obRef"
				data-ref="#ob_scythe"
				class="was-rs"
				data-name="Scythe"
				data-desc=""
				data-url="">scythes</span>, which were fastened to the wheels, and stretched out beyond the car on each side, for that cruel purpose. In a moment, while at full speed, the horses would stop, at the driver’s command. The men within would leap out, deal blows about them with their swords like hail, leap on the horses, on the pole, spring back into the chariots anyhow; and, as soon as they were safe, the horses tore away again.</span>
	</p>
	<p data-id="ch1sc1an4" class="was-anchor">Religion of the Druids</p>
	<p class="was-p">The Britons had a strange and terrible religion, called the <span data-type="religion" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">Religion of the Druids</span>. It seems to have been brought over, in very early times indeed, from the opposite country of France, anciently called <span data-type="placeRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">Gaul</span>, and to have mixed up the worship of the <span data-type="religion" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">Serpent</span>, and of the <span class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">Sun and Moon</span>, with the worship of some of the <span data-type="religion" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">Heathen Gods</span> and <span data-type="religion" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">Goddesses</span>. Most of its ceremonies were kept secret by the priests, the <span data-type="religion" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">Druids</span>, who pretended to be enchanters, and who carried magicians’ <span data-type="obRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">wands</span>, and wore, each of them, about his neck, what he told the ignorant people was a <span data-type="obRef"
			data-ref="#ob_serpents_egg"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Serpent's Egg."
			data-desc=""
			data-url="">Serpent’s egg</span> in a golden case. But it is certain that the <span data-type="religion" class="was-seg">Druidical ceremonies included the sacrifice of human victims, the torture of some suspected criminals, and, on particular occasions, even the burning alive, in immense <span data-type="obRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">wicker cages</span>, of a number of men and animals together</span>. The Druid Priests had some kind of veneration for <span class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">the Oak</span>, and for the <span data-type="obRef"
			data-ref="#ob_mistletoe"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Mistletoe"
			data-desc=""
			data-url="">mistletoe</span>—the same plant that we hang up in houses at Christmas Time now—when its white berries grew upon the Oak. They met together in dark woods, which they called <span data-type="placeRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">Sacred Groves</span>; and there they instructed, in their mysterious arts, young men who came to them as pupils, and who sometimes stayed with them as long as twenty years.</p>

	<p class="was-p">These Druids built great <span class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">Temples</span> and <span class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">altars</span>, open to the sky, fragments of some of which are yet remaining. <span data-type="placeRef"
			data-ref="#pl_stonehenge"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Stonehenge"
			data-desc="Stonehenge is a prehistoric monument in England, comprised by a round formation of stones."
			data-geo="51.178880 -1.826219"
			data-figure-url="media/pl_stonehenge.jpg"
			data-figure-alt="Stonehenge, Amesbury, Wiltshire"
			data-figure-desc="Stonehenge is believed to have been a religious site with a strong astronomical component. It was first built around 3,000BC and was modified over about 1,500 years."
			data-figure-avail="Rights Reserved - Free Access"
			data-figure-source-lbl="http://www.europeana.eu/portal/record/2022317/B2F7D8D53139B60D5993D1BED1973A0D69591624.html"
			data-figure-source-url="Europeana">Stonehenge</span>, on <span data-ref="#pl_salisbury" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">Salisbury Plain</span>, in Wiltshire, is the most extraordinary of these. Three curious stones, called <span data-type="placeRef"
			data-ref="#pl_kits_coty"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name=""
			data-desc=""
			data-geo=""
			data-figure-url=""
			data-figure-alt=""
			data-figure-desc=""
			data-figure-avail=""
			data-figure-source-lbl=""
			data-figure-source-url="">Kits Coty House</span>, on <span data-type="placeRef"
			data-ref="#pl_bluebell_hill"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Bluebell Hill"
			data-desc="Blue Bell Hill is a chalk hill between Maidstone and Rochester in the English county of Kent. Home of the Medway Megaliths."
			data-geo="51.3349681, 0.4788975"
			data-figure-url="media/pl_bluebell_hill.jpg"
			data-figure-alt="Bluebell Hill view point"
			data-figure-desc="This view point commands stunning views for miles southwards of this part of Kent, from the edge of the North Downs."
			data-figure-avail="Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 2.0 License"
			data-figure-source-lbl="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/17/Bluebell_Hill_view_point_-_geograph.org.uk_-_56032.jpg "
			data-figure-source-url="Wikipedia">Bluebell Hill</span>, near <span data-type="placeRef"
			data-ref="#pl_maidstone"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Maidstone"
			data-desc="Maidstone has been inhabited from the Mesolithic times and has seen settlements by the Romans. Maidstone produced ragstone, used for Roman walls. "
			data-geo="51.2627597 0.4500384 "
			data-figure-url="media/pl_maidstone.jpg"
			data-figure-alt="Quarrying Kentish ragstone"
			data-figure-desc="The area is still mined for ragstone, which is has been used in many historical buildings."
			data-figure-avail="Rights Reserved - Free Access "
			data-figure-source-lbl="http://www.europeana.eu/portal/record/2024904/photography_ProvidedCHO_TopFoto_co_uk_EU030794.html"
			data-figure-source-url="Europeana">Maidstone</span>, in <span data-type="placeRef"
			data-ref="#pl_kent"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Kent (Cantium)"
			data-desc="Kent is a country in South East England with a long history of human occupation."
			data-geo="51.1949374 0.1822119"
			data-figure-url="media/pl_kent.jpg"
			data-figure-alt="Ruins of Richborough fort"
			data-figure-desc="The outer defensive works and one wall of Richborough Fort in Kent, which was the main entry point to Britain for Romans."
			data-figure-avail="Public Domain"
			data-figure-source-lbl="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richborough_Castle#/media/File:Richborough_Roman_Fort.JPG"
			data-figure-source-url="Wikipedia">Kent</span>, form another. We know, from examination of the great blocks of which such buildings are made, that they could not have been raised without the aid of some ingenious machines, which are common now, but which the ancient Britons certainly did not use in making their own uncomfortable houses. <span data-type="religion" class="was-seg">I should not wonder if the Druids, and their pupils who stayed with them twenty years, knowing more than the rest of the Britons, kept the people out of sight while they made these buildings, and then pretended that they built them by magic.</span> Perhaps they had a hand in the fortresses too; at all events, as they were very powerful, and very much believed in, and as they made and executed the laws, and paid no taxes, I don’t wonder that they liked their trade. And, as they persuaded the people the more Druids there were, the better off the people would be, I don’t wonder that there were a good many of them. But it is pleasant to think that there are no Druids, <em data-rend="italics" class="was-hi">now</em>, who go on in that way, and pretend to carry Enchanters’ Wands and Serpents’ Eggs—and of course there is nothing of the kind, anywhere.</p>
	<p data-id="ch1sc2" data-unit="scene" class="was-milestone">Roman England</p>
	<p data-type="mDate" data-n="d1" class="was-note">
		<span data-instant="false" class="was-date">55 BC</span>
	</p>
	<p data-id="ch2sc1an1" class="was-anchor">Julius Caesar Invasion</p>
	<p class="was-p">Such was the improved condition of the ancient Britons,<span data-instant="false" class="was-time"> fifty-five years before the birth of Our Saviour</span>, when the <span data-type="tribe" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">Romans</span>, under their great General, <span data-type="persRef"
			data-ref="#c_julius_caesar"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Julius Caesar (Gauis Iulius Caesar)"
			data-desc="Gauis Iulius Caesar was a Roman statesman, general and notable author of Latin prose. He played a critical role in the events that led to the demise of the Roman Republic and the rise of the Roman Empire."
			data-birth="13 July 100 BC, Rome - Italy"
			data-death="15 March 44 BC, Rome Italy"
			data-figure-url="media/c_julius_caesar.jpg"
			data-figure-alt=""
			data-figure-desc=""
			data-figure-avail=""
			data-figure-source="">Julius Cæsar</span>, were masters of all the rest of the known world. Julius Cæsar had then just conquered Gaul; and hearing, in Gaul, a good deal about the opposite Island with the white cliffs, and about the bravery of the Britons who inhabited it—some of whom had been fetched over to help the Gauls in the war against him—he resolved, as he was so near, to come and conquer Britain next.</p>
	<p class="was-p">So, Julius Cæsar came sailing over to this Island of ours,<span class="was-seg"> with eighty vessels and twelve thousand men</span>. And he came from the French coast between <span data-type="placeRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">Calais</span> and <span data-type="placeRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">Boulogne</span>, <em class="was-hi">‘because thence was the shortest passage into Britain;’</em> just for the same reason as our steam-boats now take the same track, every day. He expected to conquer Britain easily: but it was not such easy work as he supposed—<span class="was-seg">for the bold Britons fought most bravely;</span> and, what with not having his horse-soldiers with him (for they had been driven back by a storm), and what with having some of his vessels dashed to pieces by a high tide after they were drawn ashore, he ran great risk of being totally defeated. However, for once that the bold Britons beat him, he beat them twice; though not so soundly but that he was very glad to accept their proposals of peace, and go away.</p>

	<p class="was-p">But, in the spring of the next year, he came back; this time, with <span class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">eight hundred vessels</span> and <span class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">thirty thousand men</span>. The British tribes chose, as their general-in-chief, a Briton, whom the Romans in their Latin language called <span data-type="persRef"
			data-ref="#c_cassiv"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Cassivellaunus"
			data-desc=" British tribal chief who led the defence against Julius Caesar's second expedition to Britain in 54 BC."
			data-birth="11 April 145 (Lucania)"
			data-death="4 February 211"
			data-figure-url=""
			data-figure-alt=" "
			data-figure-desc=""
			data-figure-avail=""
			data-figure-source="  ">
			<em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Cassivellaunus</em>
				</span>, but whose British name is supposed to have been <em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Caswallon</em>. <span data-type="persTrait" data-ref="#c_cassiv" class="was-rs">A brave general he was</span>, and well he and his soldiers fought the Roman army! So well, that whenever in that war the Roman soldiers saw a great cloud of dust, and heard the rattle of the rapid British chariots, they trembled in their hearts. Besides a number of smaller battles, there was a<span class="was-seg"> battle fought near <span data-type="placeRef"
				data-ref="#pl_canterbury"
				class="was-rs"
				data-name="Canterbury (Durovernum Cantiacorum)"
				data-desc="Canterbury is a historic town in the region of Kent."
				data-geo="51.283371 1.079215"
				data-figure-url="media/pl_canterbury.jpg"
				data-figure-alt="The 'Big Dig'"
				data-figure-desc="A major archaeological project was undertaken by the Canterbury Archaeological Trust."
				data-figure-avail="Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 2.0 License"
				data-figure-source-lbl="https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Canterbury#/media/File:Canterbury_Big_Dig_2.JPG"
				data-figure-source-url="Wikipedia">Canterbury</span>, in Kent;</span> there was a battle fought near <span data-type="placeRef"
			data-ref="#pl_chertsey"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Chertsey (Cirotisege, Cerotesege)"
			data-desc="Chertsey was one of the oldest market towns in England."
			data-geo="51.386615 -0.509465"
			data-figure-url="media/pl_chertsey.jpg"
			data-figure-alt="Chertsey Bridge"
			data-figure-desc="Chertsey Bridge, between Chertsey and Laleham."
			data-figure-avail="Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 License"
			data-figure-source-lbl="https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Canterbury#/media/File:Canterbury_Big_Dig_2.JPG"
			data-figure-source-url="Wikipedia">Chertsey</span>, in <span data-type="placeRef"
			data-ref="#pl_surrey"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Surrey"
			data-desc="Surrey was inhabited by British tribes before being occupied by Romans."
			data-geo="51.2661875 -1.5136747"
			data-figure-url="media/pl_surrey.jpg"
			data-figure-alt="Stane Street at Eartham Woods"
			data-figure-desc="Stane Street was created by Romans and ran through Surrey."
			data-figure-avail="Public Domain"
			data-figure-source-lbl="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stane_Street_(Chichester)#/media/File:Stane_Street_at_Eartham_Woods.JPG"
			data-figure-source-url="Wikipedia">Surrey</span>; there was a battle fought near a marshy little town in a wood, the capital of that part of Britain which belonged to <em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Cassivellaunus</em>, and which was probably near what is now <span data-type="placeRef"
			data-ref="#pl_st_albans"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Saint Albans (Verulamium , Verlamchester, Wæclingacaester)"
			data-desc="St Albans is a city and unparished area in southern Hertfordshire, England. It was a Celitc settlement and later the second largest town in Roman Britain."
			data-geo="51.7472736 -0.3493187"
			data-figure-url="media/pl_st_albans.jpg"
			data-figure-alt="Remains of Roman Wall"
			data-figure-desc="Remains of Roman wall in St Albans, Hertfordshire, UK."
			data-figure-avail="Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 License"
			data-figure-source-lbl="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/49/StAlbansRomanWall-PS01.JPG/800px-StAlbansRomanWall-PS01.JPG"
			data-figure-source-url="Wikipedia">Saint Albans</span>, in <span data-type="placeRef"
			data-ref="#pl_hertfordshire"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Hertfordshire (Heort ford)"
			data-desc="Hertfordshire is an English county and developed through commerce serving London."
			data-geo="51.8347747 -1.3934209"
			data-figure-url="media/pl_hertfordshire.jpg"
			data-figure-alt="The Devil's Dyke"
			data-figure-desc="Julius Ceasar's troops were defeated by Cassivellaun in Hertfordshire. The Devil's Dyke was probably the site of Caesar's defeat."
			data-figure-avail="Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 License"
			data-figure-source-lbl="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Hertfordshire#/media/File:Devil%27s_Dyke_Hertfordshire_sign.jpg"
			data-figure-source-url="Wikipedia">Hertfordshire</span>. However, <span data-type="obTrait" data-ref="#c_cassiv" class="was-rs">brave</span>
		<em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Cassivellaunus</em> had the worst of it, on the whole; though he and his men always fought like lions. As the other British chiefs were jealous of him, and were always quarrelling with him, and with one another, he gave up, and proposed peace. Julius Cæsar was very glad to grant peace easily, and to go away again with all his remaining ships and men. He had expected to find pearls in Britain, and he may have found a few for anything I know; but, at all events, he found delicious oysters, and I am sure he found tough Britons—of whom, I dare say, he made the same complaint as Napoleon Bonaparte the great French General did, eighteen hundred years afterwards, when he said they were such unreasonable fellows that they never knew when they were beaten. They never <em data-rend="italics" class="was-hi">did</em> know, I believe, and never will.</p>
	<p data-id="ch2sc1an2" class="was-anchor">Towards the Great Wall</p>
	<p class="was-p">Nearly a hundred years passed on, and all that time, there was peace in Britain. <span class="was-seg">The Britons improved their towns and mode of life: became more civilised, travelled, and learnt a great deal from the Gauls and Romans.</span> At last, the Roman Emperor, <span data-type="persRef"
			data-ref="#c_tib_claud"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="&#xA;                            Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus&#xA;                        "
			data-desc="&#xA;                            In 43 AD, Claudius sent Aulus Plautius with four legions to Britain in order to subdue the Island and civiised the Britons.&#xA;                        "
			data-birth="1 August 10 BC Lugdunum (Lyon France)"
			data-death="13 October 54 AD (Rome,Italy)"
			data-figure-url="media/c_tib_claud.jpg"
			data-figure-alt="Emperor Claudius"
			data-figure-desc="Statue of Emperor Claudius on the terrace of the Roman Baths (Bath). The Terrace is lined with statues of Roman Governors of Britain, Roman Emperors and military leaders. The statues date to 1894"
			data-figure-avail="Attribution 2.5 Generic (CC BY 2.5)"
			data-figure-source="Wikipedia">Claudius</span>, sent <span data-type="persRef"
			data-ref="#c_aul_plaut"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Aulus Plautius"
			data-desc="Aulus Plautius was a Roman politician and general of the mid-1st century. He was the first to successully defeat the Britons in 43, and became the first governor of the new province, serving from 43 to 47.&#xA;                        "
			data-birth="(Unknown)"
			data-death="(Unknown)"
			data-figure-url="media/c_aul_plaut.jpg"
			data-figure-alt="The departure of the Romans from Britain, illustration from The History of the Nation"
			data-figure-desc="The departure of the Romans from Britain, illustration from The History of the Nation&#34; oil on Canvas."
			data-figure-avail=" Public Domain"
			data-figure-source="Wikigallery">
			<em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Aulus Plautius</em>
			</span>, a skilful general, with a mighty force, to subdue the Island, and shortly afterwards arrived himself. They did little; and <span data-type="persRef"
			data-ref="#c_publ_ostor"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Publius Ostorius Scapula"
			data-desc=" Publius Ostorius Scapula succeed Aulus Plautius as 2nd governor of Roman Britain (47-52 AD)&#xA;                        "
			data-birth="(Unknown)"
			data-death="Winter 52 AD (South Wales)"
			data-figure-url="media/c_publ_ostor.jpg"
			data-figure-alt="Statue of Publius Ostorius Scapula"
			data-figure-desc="Statue of Publius Ostorius Scapula on the terrace of the Roman Baths (Bath). The Terrace is lined with statues of Roman Governors of Britain, Roman Emperors and military leaders. The statues date to 1894."
			data-figure-avail="Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 License "
			data-figure-source="Wikimedia">
			<em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Ostorius Scapula</em>
			</span>, another general, came. Some of the British Chiefs of Tribes submitted. Others resolved to fight to the death. Of these brave men, the <span data-type="persTrait" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">bravest</span> was <span data-type="persRef"
			data-ref="#c_caratac"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name=" Caratacus "
			data-desc=" British chieftain of the Catuvellauni tribe, who led the British resistance to the Roman conquest. He resisted the Romans for almost a decade,and after his final defeat, he was captured and handed over to the Romans. He sentenced to death as a military prisoner, but made a speech before his execution that persuaded the Emperor Claudius to spare him.&#xA;                            He was king of the Britons and the Catuvellauni (1st century, to c.50 AD )"
			data-birth="c. 10 AD (probably in Catuvellauni territory)"
			data-death="c. 50 AD (Rome)"
			data-figure-url=""
			data-figure-alt=" Head of Caractacus"
			data-figure-desc="William Blake Visionary Head of Caractacus. Тhe Visionary Heads is a series of black chalk and pencil drawings produced by William Blake after 1818 by request of John Varley, the watercolour artist and astrologer&#xA;                            "
			data-figure-avail="Public Domain"
			data-figure-source=" Europeana ">
			<em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Caractacus</em>
	</span>, or <em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Caradoc</em>, who gave battle to the Romans, with his army, among the mountains of <span data-type="placeRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">North Wales</span>. <span data-aloud="unknown" data-direct="true" class="was-said">‘This day,’</span> said he to his soldiers, <span data-aloud="unknown" data-direct="true" class="was-said">‘decides the fate of Britain! Your liberty, or your eternal slavery, dates from this hour. Remember your brave ancestors, who drove the great Cæsar himself across the sea!’ </span>On hearing these words, his men, with a great shout, rushed upon the Romans. But the strong Roman swords and armour were too much for the weaker British weapons in close conflict. The Britons lost the day. The wife and daughter of the brave <em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Caractacus</em> were taken prisoners; his brothers delivered themselves up; he himself was betrayed into the hands of the Romans by his false and base stepmother: and they carried him, and all his family, in triumph to Rome.</p>
	<p class="was-p">
		<span class="was-seg">But a great man will be great in misfortune, great in prison, great in chains. His noble air, and dignified endurance of distress, so touched the Roman people who thronged the streets to see him, that he and his family were restored to freedom.</span> No one knows whether his great heart broke, and he died in Rome, or whether he ever returned to his own dear country. <span data-instant="false" class="was-time">English oaks have grown up from acorns, and withered away, when they were hundreds of years old—and other oaks have sprung up in their places, and died too, very aged—</span>since the rest of the history of the brave <em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Caractacus</em> was forgotten.</p>
	<p class="was-p">Still, the Britons <em data-rend="italics" class="was-hi">would not</em> yield. They rose again and again, and died by thousands, sword in hand. They rose, on every possible occasion. <span data-type="persRef"
			data-ref="#c_gauis_suet"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Gaius Suetonius Tranquillus"
			data-desc="Roman administrator and historian belonging to the equestrian order who wrote during the early Imperial era of the Roman Empire. His most notable work is a set of biographies of twelve successive Roman rulers, from Julius Caesar to Domitian, entitled &#34;De Vita Caesarum  and published in 11 AD. In 121 he was promoted to secretary of the imperial correspondence"
			data-birth="69 AD (Hippo Regius, Roman Africa (modern Annaba, Algeria) (uncertain)"
			data-death="after 122 AD, c. 140 AD (Unknown)"
			data-figure-url="media/c_gaius_suet.jpg"
			data-figure-alt="Portrait of Gaius Suetonius Tranquillus"
			data-figure-desc="Portrait of Gaius Suetonius Tranquillus"
			data-figure-avail=" Public Domain "
			data-figure-source="Europeana">
			<em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Suetonius</em>
			</span>, another Roman general, came, and stormed the <span data-type="placeRef"
			data-ref="#pl_isle_of_anglesey"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Island of Anglesey"
			data-desc="Numerous megalithic monuments and menhirs are present on Anglesey, and it has been associated with druids."
			data-geo="53.2770416 -4.8734052"
			data-figure-url="media/pl_anglesey.jpg"
			data-figure-alt="Cromlech at Plas Newydd"
			data-figure-desc="Cromlech at Plas Newydd, monolithic monument at Island of Anglesey."
			data-figure-avail="Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 License"
			data-figure-source-lbl="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plas_Newydd_(Anglesey)#/media/File:Cromlech_at_Plas_Newydd_in_Anglesey.jpeg"
			data-figure-source-url="Wikipedia">Island of Anglesey</span> (then called <em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Mona</em>), which was supposed to be sacred, and he <span class="was-seg">burnt the Druids in their own wicker cages, by their own fires</span>. But, even while he was in Britain, with his victorious troops, the <em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Britons</em> rose. Because <span data-type="persRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">
			<em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Boadicea</em>
			</span>, a British queen, the widow of the King of the <span data-type="placeRef"
			data-ref="#pl_norfolk"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Norfolk (Norðfolc, Nordfolc)"
			data-desc="Norfolk is a rural county with an extensive and industrious population and history."
			data-geo="52.6687479 -0.1714611"
			data-figure-url="media/pl_norfolk.jpg"
			data-figure-alt="Burgh Castle"
			data-figure-desc="Burgh Castle Built in around 280AD. It was a Roman cavalry fort used to protect the coast from invaders from where Northern Germany is now."
			data-figure-avail="Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 2.0 License"
			data-figure-source-lbl="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Norfolk#/media/File:Burgh_Castle_-_geograph.org.uk_-_154039.jpg"
			data-figure-source-url="Wikipedia">Norfolk</span> and <span data-type="placeRef"
			data-ref="#pl_suffolk"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Suffolk"
			data-desc="Suffolk is an East Anglian county of historic origin in England."
			data-geo="52.2355148 -0.0665338"
			data-figure-url="media/pl_suffolk.jpg"
			data-figure-alt="Excavations at Sutton Hoo"
			data-figure-desc="Sutton Hoo, near Woodbridge, East Anglia, is the site of two ancient cemeteries and excavations have brought to light many artefacts."
			data-figure-avail="Rights Reserved - Free Access "
			data-figure-source-lbl="http://www.europeana.eu/portal/record/2048087/ProvidedCHO_Wakefield_Council_WAKGMP___P1999_1968.html"
			data-figure-source-url="Wikipedia">Suffolk</span> people, resisted the plundering of her property by the Romans who were settled in England, she was scourged, by order of <span data-type="persRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">
			<em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Catus</em>
			</span> a Roman officer; and her two daughters were shamefully insulted in her presence, and her husband’s relations were made slaves. To avenge this injury, the Britons rose, with all their might and rage. They drove <span data-type="persRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">
			<em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Catus</em>
	</span> into Gaul; they laid the Roman possessions waste; they forced the Romans out of London, then a poor little town, but a trading place; they hanged, burnt, crucified, and slew by the sword, seventy thousand Romans in a few days. <em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Suetonius</em> strengthened his army, and advanced to give them battle. They strengthened their army, and desperately attacked his, on the field where it was strongly posted. Before the first charge of the Britons was made, <em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Boadicea</em>, <span data-type="persTrait" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">in a war-chariot, with her fair hair streaming in th e wind, and her injured daughters lying at her feet</span>, drove among the troops, and cried to them for vengeance on their oppressors, the licentious Romans. The Britons fought to the last; but they were vanquished with great slaughter, and the unhappy queen took poison.</p>
	<p class="was-p">Still, the spirit of the Britons was not broken. When <em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Suetonius</em> left the country, they fell upon his troops, and retook the Island of Anglesey. <span data-type="persRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">
			<em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Agricola</em>
			</span> came,<span data-instant="false" class="was-time"> fifteen or twenty years afterwards,</span> and retook it once more, and devoted seven years to subduing the country, especially that part of it which is now called <em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Scotland</em>; but, its people, the <span data-type="tribe" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">Caledonians</span>, resisted him at every inch of ground. They fought the bloodiest battles with him; they killed their very wives and children, to prevent his making prisoners of them; they fell, fighting, in such great numbers that certain hills in Scotland are yet supposed to be vast heaps of stones piled up above their graves. <span data-type="persRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">
			<em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Hadrian</em>
			</span> came, <span data-instant="false" class="was-time">thirty years afterwards</span>, and still they resisted him. <em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Severus</em> came, <span data-instant="false" class="was-time">nearly a hundred years afterwards</span>, and they worried his great army like dogs, and rejoiced to see them die, by thousands, in the bogs and swamps. <span data-type="persRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">
			<em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Caracalla</em>
			</span>, the son and successor of <span data-type="persRef"
			data-ref="#c_marc_aur_sever"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Marcus Aurelius Severus Antoninus Augustus"
			data-desc="  He was emperor of Roman Empire (198 – 8 April 217) "
			data-birth="4 April 188 AD (Lugdunum)"
			data-death="8 April 217 AD (On the road between Edessa and Carrhae)"
			data-figure-url=""
			data-figure-alt="Portrait of young Caracalla "
			data-figure-desc="Portrait of young Caracalla  "
			data-figure-avail="Public Domain "
			data-figure-source=" Europeana">
			<em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Severus</em>
	</span>, did the most to conquer them, for a time; but not by force of arms. He knew how little that would do. He yielded up a quantity of land to the Caledonians, and gave the Britons the same privileges as the Romans possessed. There was peace, after this, for seventy years.</p>
	<p data-id="ch2sc1an3" class="was-anchor">The first Saxons</p>
	<p class="was-p">Then new enemies arose. They were the <span data-type="tribe" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">Saxons</span>, a fierce, sea-faring people from the countries to the <span data-type="placeRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">North of the Rhine</span>, the great river of Germany on the banks of which the best grapes grow to make the <span data-type="obRef"
			data-ref="#ob_wine"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Wine"
			data-desc=""
			data-url="media/ob_wine.jpg">German wine</span>. They began to come, in pirate ships, to the sea-coast of Gaul and Britain, and to plunder them. They were repulsed by <span data-type="persRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">
			<em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Carausius</em>
			</span>, a native either of Belgium or of Britain, who was appointed by the Romans to the command, and under whom the Britons first began to fight upon the sea. But, after this time, they renewed their ravages. A few years more, and the <span data-type="tribe" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">Scots</span> (which was then the name for the people of Ireland), and the <span data-type="tribe" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">Picts</span>, a northern people, began to make frequent plundering incursions into the South of Britain. All these attacks were repeated, at intervals, during two hundred years, and through a long succession of Roman Emperors and chiefs; during all which length of time, the Britons rose against the Romans, over and over again. At last, in the days of the Roman <span data-type="persRef"
			data-ref="#c_flav_honor"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Flavius Honorius Augustus"
			data-desc="Honorius is widely considered as one of the worst of the emperors; it was during his reign that Rome was sacked for the first time in 800 years (23 January 393 – 15 August 423) "
			data-birth="9 September 384 (Constantinople)"
			data-death="15 August 423 (Ravenna, Italia)"
			data-figure-url="media/c_flav_honor.jpg"
			data-figure-alt=" emperor Honorius"
			data-figure-desc="Consular diptych of Probus Anicius, consul in 406, depicting emperor Honorius. Photograph from Ludwig von Sybel, Christliche Antike, vol. 2, Marburg, 1909.&#xA;                            "
			data-figure-avail="Public Domain"
			data-figure-source=" Wikipedia ">
			<em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Honorius</em>
	</span>, when the Roman power all over the world was fast declining, and when Rome wanted all her soldiers at home, the Romans abandoned all hope of conquering Britain, and went away. And still, at last, as at first, the Britons rose against them, in their old brave manner; for, a very little while before, they had turned away the Roman magistrates, and declared themselves an independent people.</p>
	<p data-id="ch2sc1an4" class="was-anchor">The Roman legagy</p>
	<p class="was-p">
		<span data-instant="false" class="was-time">Five hundred years had passed</span>, since Julius Cæsar’s first invasion of the Island, when the Romans departed from it for ever. <span class="was-seg">In the course of that time, although they had been the cause of terrible fighting and bloodshed, they had done much to improve the condition of the Britons. They had made great <span data-type="obRef"
				data-ref="#ob_mil_roads"
				class="was-rs"
				data-name="Military Roads"
				data-desc=""
				data-url="">military roads</span>; they had built <span data-type="obRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">forts</span>; they had taught them how to dress, and arm themselves, much better than they had ever known how to do before; they had refined the whole British way of living. <span data-type="persRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">
				<em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Agricola</em>
				</span> had built <span data-type="placeRef"
				data-ref="#pl_hadrian_wall"
				class="was-rs"
				data-name="Hadrian's Wall"
				data-desc="Hadrian's Wall was a defensive fortification in the Roman province of Britannia, built during the reign of the emperor Hadrian."
				data-geo="54.9898985 -2.603885 "
				data-figure-url="media/pl_hadrians_wall.jpg"
				data-figure-alt="Hadrian's Wall"
				data-figure-desc="Hadrian's Wall, west of Birdoswald Roman fort."
				data-figure-avail="Rights Reserved - Free Access "
				data-figure-source-lbl="http://www.europeana.eu/portal/record/2022363/ct15002.html"
				data-figure-source-url="Europeana">a great wall of earth</span>, <span data-type="obTrait" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">more than seventy miles long, extending from Newcastle to beyond Carlisle</span>, for the purpose of keeping out the Picts and Scots; <em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Hadrian</em> had strengthened it; <span data-type="persRef"
				data-ref="#c_marc_aur_sever"
				class="was-rs"
				data-name="Marcus Aurelius Severus Antoninus Augustus"
				data-desc="  He was emperor of Roman Empire (198 – 8 April 217) "
				data-birth="4 April 188 AD (Lugdunum)"
				data-death="8 April 217 AD (On the road between Edessa and Carrhae)"
				data-figure-url=""
				data-figure-alt="Portrait of young Caracalla "
				data-figure-desc="Portrait of young Caracalla  "
				data-figure-avail="Public Domain "
				data-figure-source=" Europeana">
				<em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Severus</em>
		</span>, finding it much in want of repair, had built it afresh of stone.</span>
	</p>
	<p class="was-p">Above all, it was in the Roman time, and by means of Roman ships, that the <span data-type="religion" class="was-seg">Christian Religion</span> was first brought into Britain, and its people first taught the great lesson that, <span class="was-seg">to be good in the sight of <em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">God</em>, they must love their neighbours as themselves, and do unto others as they would be done by</span>. The Druids declared that it was very wicked to believe in any such thing, and cursed all the people who did believe it, very heartily. But, when the people found that they were none the better for the blessings of the Druids, and none the worse for the curses of the Druids, but, that <span class="was-seg">the sun shone and the rain fell without consulting the Druids at all</span>, they just began to think that the Druids were mere men, and that it signified very little whether they cursed or blessed. After which, the pupils of the Druids fell off greatly in numbers, and the Druids took to other trades.</p>
	<p class="was-p">Thus I have come to the end of the Roman time in England. It is but little that is known of those five hundred years; but some remains of them are still found. Often, when labourers are digging up the ground, to make foundations for houses or churches, they light on rusty <span data-type="obRef"
			data-ref="#ob_roman_money"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Roman Coins"
			data-desc=""
			data-url="">money</span> that once belonged to the Romans. Fragments of <span data-type="obRef"
			data-ref="#ob_eartenhware"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Earthenware"
			data-desc=""
			data-url="http://europeana.eu/portal/record/2022324/290426.html">plates</span> from which they ate, of <span data-type="obRef"
			data-ref="#ob_goblet"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Fragments of Roman goblet"
			data-desc=""
			data-url="">goblets</span> from which they drank, and of <span data-type="obRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">pavement</span> on which they trod, are discovered among the earth that is broken by the plough, or the dust that is crumbled by the gardener’s spade. Wells that the Romans sunk, still yield water; roads that the Romans made, form part of our highways. In some old battle-fields, British spear-heads and Roman armour have been found, mingled together in decay, as they fell in the thick pressure of the fight. Traces of Roman camps overgrown with grass, and of mounds that are the burial-places of heaps of Britons, are to be seen in almost all parts of the country. Across the bleak moors of <span data-type="placeRef"
			data-ref="#pl_northumbeland"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Northumberland"
			data-desc="Northumberland, England's northernmost county has been home and battlefield for Romans, Anglians, Celts, Norman and Scots. "
			data-geo="55.2954456 -2.6355857"
			data-figure-url="media/pl_northumberland.png"
			data-figure-alt="Northumberland"
			data-figure-desc="Map location"
			data-figure-avail=""
			data-figure-source-lbl="https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Northumberland"
			data-figure-source-url="">Northumberland</span>, the wall of <span data-type="persRef"
			data-ref="#c_marc_aur_sever"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Marcus Aurelius Severus Antoninus Augustus"
			data-desc="  He was emperor of Roman Empire (198 – 8 April 217) "
			data-birth="4 April 188 AD (Lugdunum)"
			data-death="8 April 217 AD (On the road between Edessa and Carrhae)"
			data-figure-url=""
			data-figure-alt="Portrait of young Caracalla "
			data-figure-desc="Portrait of young Caracalla  "
			data-figure-avail="Public Domain "
			data-figure-source=" Europeana">
			<em data-rend="smallcap" class="was-hi">Severus</em>
			</span>, overrun with <span data-type="obRef"
			data-ref="#ob_moss"
			class="was-rs"
			data-name="Moss"
			data-desc=""
			data-url=")">moss</span> and <span data-type="obRef" class="was-rs" data-empty="empty">weeds</span>, still stretches, a strong ruin; and the shepherds and their dogs lie sleeping on it in the summer weather. On Salisbury Plain, Stonehenge yet stands: <span data-type="obTrait" data-ref="#pl_stonehenge" class="was-rs">
			<span data-type="religion" class="was-seg">a monument of the earlier time when the Roman name was unknown in Britain, and when the Druids, with their best magic wands, could not have written it in the sands of the wild sea-shore</span>
	</span>.</p>
</section>
